So, this is video three of the abstract
class challenge, and this is the optional
section, where we're actually looking
at implementing a search tree.
Now, the search tree's very similar to a
link list, but the differences are mainly
in the implementations of the add item,
remove item, and traverse methods.
So what I'm going to do is actually
create this SearchTree class first.
Then as we go through it,
I'll actually explain it more.
Then I'll actually show you a diagram
of how a search tree works,
compared to a LinkedList.
So we're going to start off
writing some code there.
So we're gonna create a new class, Java
class and I'm gonna call it SearchTree,
and this class should actually implement
node list as the other one did,
as MyLinkedList did, so implements
note list until you got the right to
method that's mean we need to overwrite.
It will start up with the private
list item group equals now and
will host, have a constructor which
is going to be pass the route item,
which will set that to the route head.
That's we did that in the my link list.
Now let's override the necessary methods,
so we're going to just do a command in.
And override, and I'm going to,
to be more specific,
I should actually select implement,
even though you can get to both menus.
But when I select implement
we only get methods that
can be implemented which come from the
correct place, nodeless, so we'll do that.
We'll select those.
And in terms of functionality, firstly
the getRoot is obviously very simple.
That's gonna just,
literally just return this.root.
And we've obviously got
the other methods now.
And we'll actually start going
through those one by one.
So we'll start off with
the add-item method.
Now this has actually got the same
structure as in the case of the LinkList.
But instead of actually breaking and
recreating links to insert,
we're actually gonna keep
traversing the actual tree itself.
Moving left to right is appropriate,
until we reach a node that is null.
So let's talk more about
what this search tree is,
before we actually go too much further.
So we're looking at implementing a binary
search tree, as opposed to a link, so
what I'm going to do is bring up an image
on the screen now, which is this one.
And we'll just talk a little about that
and how this actually works because
traversing upon research tree is not
really as straight forward as it is for
a LinkedList.
If you recall the LinkedList traversal
just involves going from node to node
untill you get a null reference.
So either go and using previous to go
back, or next to go to the next entries.
And too,
when you find one of those is null,
then you've reached either the start,
or the end of the list.
That's the case of a link list, but
traversing the search tree involves
actually visiting every node to the left,
then the root, and then every node
to the right in the same way.
And you can see the example
of that on the screen.
So if we can just go through
what this bonus history does.
So from the root at the top here, you can
see we keep travelling left of Adelaide,
so we're actually moving down and
going left, left, left,
left until we get as far down as we can.
Then we go up to Adelaide,
Adelaide's parent, which is Brisbane, so
note that we didn't go there directly.
We went all the way down, and
came back up to Brisbane.
In this left tree we go right to Canberra,
you can see, and
Canberra's got no children at this level,
so we visit Canberra.
And then onto it's parent,
which is Darwin.
So again, it's going back up to
Darwin again, as you can see there.
And having visited Darwin
in it's left tree,
again, having gone down that way,
we go right towards Perth, down here.
And Perth, as Perth's got a left child,
we're actually going to visit Melbourne.
Melbourne's got no children, so
we visit its parent, Perth again.
Having visited Perth and its left tree
already, we actually come down here and
go right to Sydney.
And now Sydney's got no children and
we've visited every node,
that's the end of the traversal.
Now if we had, if we actually printed the
value of every node that we visited rather
than pass through, and
there was a difference there,
we get the cities in alphabetical order.
But big thing here is, big difference is
there is no link back from a child towards
parent, so when we get to Adelaide,
when we get down here, there is no way for
us to know got there via Brisbane.
So this makes an iterative traverse of
a binary SearchTree extremely complicated,
because we haven't got the direct
reference using a .Previous, for example,
that we would have in the LinkedList.
However, if you look at the tree
with Darwin as its root,
up here, this is made up of a left
tree with Brisbane as its root.
And a right tree with Perth as its
Its root as you can see the two left
and right there.
So we can then describe
Brisbon's left tree,
as a tree with Adelaide as its root,
with no children.
And a sign for
Caberra Melbourne and Sydney.
So therefore a tree can be described as
a root with optionally, a left tree and
right tree.
Now the tree in this slide of the screen
there now shows the Darwin tree,
which consists of the root Darwin,
plus the Brisbon tree, and the Perth tree.
So, I hope that actually makes
sense as to what we're doing here,
the differences between
the binary search tree.
And I'll talk more about the advantages of
a binary search tree as we go through this
as well, particularly towards
the end of the lecture,
because it is actually a very important
part of database management systems.
They use binary search trees.
So it's a good skill for you to have.
So what we're going to do,
given that we need to actually continually
go back through some of these notes,
we're actually going to
write a recursive function.
So any definition that includes
an object in its own definition is
known as a recursive definition.
And objects that can be defined
recursively can be processed recursively.
So what we're going to do
is write a recursive method
to help us traverse through the list.
So to do that I'm going
back here in search tree.
So the traverse code's going to be, so
that's going to be recursive method.
If root is not equal to null,
we're gonna traverse
root.previous, and
we're going to actually also
print out root.getValue.
That should be println, not printf.
And traverse(root.next).
So looking at that code on the screen,
and bringing back the image again,
so when we call traverse for the first
time, the root's going to be Darwin.
So what is passed to it as a parameter
is Darwin, so this is not null,
which in this case it won't be.
So if that's the case,
we come down here and
traverse is called again,
with stop previous,
which is the lest node of Darwin, which
in this case is going to be Brisbane.
So this is also not null, so
traverse is called again, and
it's actually called again with Adelaide
as its route this time, so Adelaide gets
called the list item for, Adelaide
gets called to the traverse method.
This eventually ends up being null because
we can't actually go to a previous because
there is no previous for Adelaide.
So this is nome because the code is
not equal to nome it will do this,
it won't need anymore
processing at this point.
So traversed returns to the line.
After traverse in that case,
which is Adelaide.previous, and
prints the value of Adelaide.
Because it's finished at that point, it's
then gonna print out this line there and
the current line is gonna be Adelaide.
So traverse is then called again,
this time.
This is the next line with Adelaide.next,
that's null.
So the invocation of traverse returns
to the line after traverse which is
Adelaide.next.
So there's no further instructions,
so this invocation of traverse
returns to the point after traversal,
which is Brisbrane.previous.
Then calles itself the prism dot prisbon,
camber is the root, and so on.
Now I know that complicated, and
there's a bit of information
to suggest that recursive methods
really are complicated, but
all you really need to consider is that
recursive method is just a method.
It's just a method call,
like any other method call, but
we just happen to be
calling ourselves again.
Calling another copy ourselves,
if you will.
So to test a traversal method, we can
change the declaration of list in main,
to be a search tree.
So let's go and do that.
At the moment we've got a list here,
MyLinkedList.
Let's change that actually
to our SearchTree.
And what I'm going to do there,
let's actually just change this variable,
refactor it.
We'll rename it to tree like so,
press Enter.
And we're gonna change that so
it's not a linked list anymore,
it's obviously gonna be a SearchTree.
Before we actually run this then we've got
it commentated and got it ready to go,
and what we need to do is
actually add our item methods.
You go back to search tree, you come here
into add item because at the moment it's
not actually doing any processing and
we're going to actually paste some code
in, and
then we'll actually go through the code.
So this is the actual code up that I've
pasted in for the add item which is
different from the search tree than
it actually is for the link list.
And the major difference is it's very
similar so it's got the same structure
like it has for the link list but instead
of breaking and recreating links to insert
we don't actually need to do that, so
we just keep retraversing the tree
moving left or right as appropriate
until we reach a note that is null.
Now once we reach the end
of a path through the tree,
this becomes the position
to insert at new item.
So you can see the code there
first that we're checking for
null, which is very similar to
what we did in the linked list.
If it's empty our item becomes the head
of the tree at the new return.
Otherwise, we start comparing
which again is very similar.
Then we go through actually making a while
loop, checking to make sure that it's not
null, and
there's a bit of a note I'll add shortly.
So I'll add the comparison,
we'll do it using the .compareTo which
was the same if it's less than zero,
then it means that the new item, the new
item is what we are actually using here.
If that is actually greater, we actually
have to try and move right if we can, so
we keep doing a test.
Firstly to see whether .next has got
something, that's not equal to null.
And if it has we actually
move on to the next record.
Otherwise there's no node to the right so
we know this point because it's
a null we can actually add our item.
So we do that then return true.
Otherwise if the comparison's greater than
zero then that means that the new item
we're trying to add is less in a sort
order perspective so we need to try and
move left if possible.
So if the current item's
previous is not equal to null,
we go to the previous entry.
Bearing mind we're going to
wall link with both of these.
So we're going to continue doing
that until we get to the point.
Otherwise else has no name to the left so
we can actually add it at this point.
So we're actually then using
the dot set previous for
the new item to actually
put it in that spot.
Then we return and, of course,
we decided in the link, the by-link list,
that duplicates we wouldn't add.
And we're doing the same thing here.
So if comparison actually returns zero,
it means the item's duplicated, and
we don't try to actually re-add it again.
So that's actually the add item, so
basically where is the insertion in the
delete list next to previous insertions,
as I mentioned, unless the insertion
was at the end of the list.
In the case of a search tree, insertion's
always going to be at the end of a path,
so you keep going left or right until you
can't go any further, so in other words,
until you actually find null and
you put it in there.
But one consequence of that, and this is
what I wanted to bring up about the wallet
here, is that the wallet is never going
to terminate naturally, so the program's
going to return, and if you can see,
we've actually got returns in here.
In this case, for
the three scenarios with the compare.
So that's not a problem, and
our code's gonna work fine, but
the condition, just want to make
it clear that the actual condition
while currentItem's not equal to
null can never actually be false.
Cuz we're always checking for
null before moving left or right.
So technically we could have
written the code as while true, and
removed the need to have the return
false at the end if we wanted to.
But I left that in there because
I think that's more readable.
That's certainly personal
preference there.
Okay, so that's the code for addItem.
So we should now be able to go back to our
main and we should be able to run this and
we should hopefully get a result.
If you run this,
you get things in the correct order so
it's actually working fine now.
So you can see 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
And just to confirm,
I'll comment that out and go back and
put in our original string, and run that.
Canberra's already present, so
we're not getting duplicates added.
Adelaide, Brisbane, Canberra,
Darwin, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney.
So, it's actually sorting in
alphabetical order for that as well.
So, as you can see, now,
it looks complicated.
You might look at that and think,
well, is this really that simple?
But that's really all there
is to a recursive method.
They sound complicated and
when I was first introduce to them I found
them a little bit overwhelming to get
use to but, really it's just
a method call like anything else.
It just happened to be calling
itself rather than another method.
That's the way to really
treat it in this case.
And just out of interest it's actually
possible to write a link list recursively
as a root followed by link list,
and the link, so
the link list traverse method
could then be rewritten.
So we'll just quickly go through and
look at that.
Now that's our traverse method for
our mylink list.
So I've actually just
comment that out briefly, so
we can actually rewrite that as this,
if root is not equal to null.
We can actually print root dot get value.
And if we just do traverse root dot next.
It's that simple,
we could actually do that if we wanted to,
but generally it's not a good idea to do
that due to the depth of the recursion.
In other words,
how many times it's calling itself.
So a well balanced binary tree with
billions of records, billions of nodes,
we'd have a maximum depth of around 63.
Now basically in a huge database,
if we had this many records,
I can't even actually print it,
I can't even say it because it's so big,
it would only take 63 sort of levels,
if you will,
a depth of 63 to actually go
right through all those records.
But with a similarly sized linked list
it would not start to return it to all
the nodes had been printed, so I'd have
to go through the entire linked list, and
the stacks can overflow well before in
other words they are going to crash.
So you do need to make sure that
recursive functions are only picked for
certain functions and
not sort of just used every where.
In this case for a LinkedList, it doesn't
make sense to actually use one because
you're going to crash once you start
getting substantial number of records.
So I'm gonna just undo that.
But again for that binary trade it's
actually optimized for that and even for
that many large number of records it still
is only gonna be in the maximum 63 deep
which will be fine for
most platforms that are running in Java.
Which brings us to the next solution
at the moment with the remove item.
And it was pretty simple
in the MyLinkedList,
there wasn't really a lot to it.
Go back and have a look.
There was a bit of code there,
bit of testing,
but it wasn't particularly complicated.
But with a SearchTree using the BinaryTree
it actually takes a lot of thought and
there's several conditions
we need to consider.
So first off, we need to think that if
the item to be removed has no children,
then the link to it can be set to null.
This is fairly trivial,
cuz obviously there's no children, but
we do need to keep a note in
that case to the item's parent
because there's not gonna be any
link back to that parent otherwise.
If the items to remove is
got only one child and
that's either pointing left or right and
removal is just the case of setting
the items parent to point to the child
again, that's pretty straight forward.
But the big scenario is if the item
to remove is both left and
a right child, the removal is not that
easy, because we need to ensure that
every node to the left every node to
the right is greater than it's parent.
So, basically, there's quite
a bit of work involved in that.
There's actually an algorithm to do that.
So what I'm gonna do is
paste in some code now,
just to actually show
you want we need to do.
Then we'll actually just go through and
explain what's going on here.
So I'm just gonna paste that in and
perform removal we'll
actually add in a minute.
So basically there's a few steps
involved here, so we need to first, for
the item to be deleted we move
to the right sub tree and
we keep traversing left until we
reach a node with no left child.
This is then the smallest
value in the right sub tree.
Then we set the value of the node to
be deleted to the smallest value,
and everything to the left is
already smaller than that; and
as a result this is the smallest
value to the right side tree.
And everything to the right
is greater than it.
Let me finish off by
removing the smallest node,
which is easy, as it's got either no
children, or only has a right child.
Note that, we're not actually
removing the item to be deleted.
We just sent the value of that,
value to that of another node and
we We actually remove the other node.
So this methods basically traversing
the trade, moving right or
left as appropriate until it finds
the item to be deleted in this case.
And before the actual current items
are advanced in the appropriate direction,
left or right, the parent item some
reference is set to point to it, and we're
doing it that way so that it eventually
finds the items to be deleted and
we can also have
a reference towards parent.
So this is only determining
the items to be removed.
The actual code to remove the item
is actually quite big and
we're gonna paste the code in there.
It's quite detailed as you
can see on the screen.
And they're gonna talk about one of the
ways that database management systems get
around this to keep performance high.
So basically we are to
remove item from the tree.
So if the item.next is null,
there's no right tree so
we make the parent point the left tree,
which can be null.
So if parent.next is equal to item,
parent.setNext as you can see there,
item is right but otherwise if the parent
previous is equal to the item again item
is what we passed to then we set parent
setPrevious to the items previous which
actually sort of removing that link and
then adding it again.
Otherwise at this point the root is now
set to item.previous because parent must
have been the item which means we're
looking at the root of the tree.
And I'm not gonna go through
all this code now, but
basically there's an else there and we're
looking for it in the other direction.
The previous direction was sort of more or
less doing the opposite.
We're actually going down
the left tree at that point.
And we get down to the else.
This is whether either the left or
the right were null, so
deletion is now tricky.
So, we've actually got two
ways to look at it now.
So, from the right subtree,
we need to find the smallest value ie,
which is the leftmost.
And can see we go into item.next there.
And using a while loop to actually get
through until we actually get to the last
entry using current.previous.
Then we actually put the smallest value,
which is current.getValue into
item.setValue, using item.setValue.
Then we actually delete the smallest item,
and again there's no actual delete as
such, we're actually just
changing the pointer effectively.
And you see otherwise in the situation
where leftmost parent wasn't equal to
autumn, we actually set the previews
to the next record down from
the count that we're
actually going through.
I know that sounds incredibly
confusing but the bottom line is
Barnes Research Trees are allot more
complicated as a result of that.
And deleting an item is way more
complicated in the binary search tree.
And a lot of database management systems
that actually use binary search trees,
they don't actually delete
the records straight away.
So, they're often flagged
as being deleted,
which means it's just like
a flag set in the record.
And they're actually ignored in the
searches and queries as a result of that.
And the actual deletion, the physical
deletion of the actual data only occurs
perhaps during out-of-hours and
maintenance procedures,
you know recompacting or
reindexing the database.
Because you can imagine with all this
code, if there's hundreds or thousands or
millions of record,
it's going to take a long time to process,
so again, pick your poison.
You can't always choose.
Part of becoming a good programmer
is learning the best solutions or
best code to tackle a particular solution,
and that will come over time and with more
experience, so I don't expect you to
fully understand the binary search tree.
If you sort of understand what's
happening at a high level,
then you're probably on
the right track here.
And you'll find out more
about binary search trees and
find out more about this code as we move
forward in the course, because a lot of it
will start making more sense as you just
spend some time working with the concepts.
So, just before I finish off,
now that we've actually added removeItem,
we should actually be able to
remove some of these things.
So, if I just comment this out again.
That numbers back in again,
we should now be able to, called that out.
This coach will all now work for
us, don't comment that and
we should be able to run all that and
get the same results of deletions.
And you can see we got deletion,
deleted item 3, 1, 2,
4, and scrolling all the way down,
deleting item 1 was the last entry.
Deleting item 6,
you can see one 6 and one on 7,
and eventually we ended
up with an empty list.
So the codes are working fine.
So that's it, that's abstract classes and
the challenge and
again don't be too stressed if you
don't fully understand the SearchTree.
I've deliberately thrown that in to show
you some more advanced concepts of Java.
The main thing was to focus
on the first two videos,
which was the basic component
of the challenge, and
I hope you did well out of that and
also got a load out of this.
So that's now the end of this section.
In the next section,
we're going to be moving on to generics,
which is quite an exciting
concept of Java.
So I'll see you in that next section.